Over the course of hw1 I tried several algorithms. Descriptions of each follow. All scores reported are AER on the dev set. A shorter summary of results can be found in results.txt.

The first was a simple approach, wherein each target word was aligned to the source word closest to the diagonal. This approach scored 0.741798, slightly better than the dice coefficient default. Code is in src/diag.py.

The second was IBM1. The default implementation did now allow for null links and scored a 0.420189. Allowing null alignments decreased that to 0.418107. From there I tried lowercasing, which got a 0.415609, and stemming which got a 0.406101. Code is in src/IBM1/IBM1.py.

Stemming was done using the German snowball stemmer on the source, and the Porter stemmer on the target. For some reason my installation of NLTK included all snowball stemmers except the English one.

The third approach was Vogel et Al's HMM model. Their model did not use forward-backward to sum over alignments, but rather just used the Viterbi one-best alignment. I followed that approach here, and scored a 0.267823 with the basic model on the stemmed data. I also tried running the system in reverse, which scored a 0.313898, and then symmetrizing. Grow-diag-final scored a 0.322599, worse than either monodirectional alignment. Code is in src/HMM/HMM.py.

The fourth approach I tried was the HMM model, improved will full foward-backward algorithm. Unfortunately my python implementation of this algorithm was too slow to produce results by the deadline. Code is in src/HMMFB/HMM.py and src/HMMFB/Align.py.

Finally, I wrote an alignment post-editor script that goes over the alignments generated by any of the above models and removes links likely to be incorrect. First, I remove links to source words with fertility greater than six, as these are likely garbage collection. Secondly, I remove links between punctuation symbols and non punctuation symbols. Third, I remove links between numeric tokens and non numeric tokens. Finally, I remove links between source singletons and target non-singletons, if the link isn't strictly one-to-one. This improved the score on the overall best system, HMM source-to-target with stemming, to 0.243939.
